The case of research-based and group-based project works

In research-based and group-based project (RGP) work, the students‘ assignments are data analysis tasks or advanced application development tasks that are to be conducted in a group of students during the term along with a pre-defined research question. The students in RGPs are divided into small groups of two to four participants. Each group independently plans, designs, implements and evaluates their solution to the given task in parallel to the weekly lectures. The results are written up in a technical report following standards of good scientific practice and technical writing. 

The rationale of research-based and project-based group learning is to stimulate students’ experience and ability to learn independently. The advantages have largely been acknowledged and include overcoming the weaknesses of written exams and allowing students to exploit their potential and creativity and working on real-world problems. With running RGPs, students’ activities are stimulated through interesting real-world tasks and potentially generate input for research papers. It is important to note that the research publication is optional, i. e., students are invited to go this path, but it is not mandatory and not part of the grading, if the paper gets accepted or not. In the past, RGPs have already resulted in very respected and highly visible publications at international conferences. 
I have adapted the concept of RGPs to the concept of publication-oriented theses, which is an alternative format to the traditional thesis format. In a publication-oriented thesis, the same tasks at the same level of difficulty are conducted as in a traditional thesis. However, the idea is to directly structure and write the theses in a format and in a style which can be submitted at international conferences. The publication-oriented thesis consists of an 8-10 pages research paper and a technical documentation. Writing a publication-oriented thesis is optional. If a student decides not to follow this option, he/she is ensured that this has no impact on the grade.


